---
description: 'In this section I briefly present my research.'
layout: page
nocite: '@*'
permalink: '/research/'
title: research
---

Research
--------

<img class="three" src="{{ '/assets/img/WC.png' | prepend: site.baseurl | prepend: site.url }}">

The figure above shows the [Wordcloud](https://www.wordclouds.com/) of
the abstracts of my papers. After a stemming process, the 50 most
frequent terms in the abstracts are shown with a size that is
proportional to their frequence.

The most evident terms (i.e. the biggest, namely the more frequent in
the abstract) can be grouped in three main groups:

-   network, wireless, protocol
-   data, perform, result
-   user

To some extent, this grouping well summarize my research activity that
focus on *protocols* and systems for *wireless networks* capable to
collect *data* to a) provide useful services for the users and b)
*validate* the *performance* of our results.

Furthermore, a distinctive chracteristics of my research is the attempt
to always validate the performance of the proposed solutions, both
theoretical and practical, via simulations and real testbeds.

Dirige le attività di ricerca sulle reti di sensori wireless e
l’Internet of Things, nell’ambito del gruppo di ricerca su Computer
Networks and Pervasive Systems del Dipartimento di Ingegneria
informatica automatica e gestionale Antonio Ruberti della Sapienza
Università di Roma (DIAG). In questo contesto collabora/ha collaborato
con numerosi enti di ricerca internazionali, tra cui: Research Academic
Computer Technology Institute (Grecia), Braunschweig University of
Technology (Germania), Universitat Paderborn (Germania), University of
Athens (Grecia), Ben-Gurion University of the Negev (Israele),
Universita degli Studi di Salerno (Italia), Wroclaw University of
Technology (Polonia), Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya (Spagna),
University of Geneva (Svizzera), University of Lubeck (Germania).

-   Ha fondato e dirige il laboratorio sulle wireless sensor network del
    DIAG dove le soluzioni - sia hardware che software - progettate
    nell’ambito della ricerca, vengono implementate e testate sul campo.

-   Collabora alle attività di ricerca sul cooperative design e sul
    co-design insieme ai docenti del Master of Science in Product Design
    della Sapienza. In particolare è responsabile delle attività di
    ricerca sull’impiego degli algoritmi genetici per il design di
    prodotti.

Bibliography
------------

A likely more recent list of my publications can be found in:

-   [Google
    Scolar](https://scholar.google.ca/citations?user=tN4xL-IAAAAJ&hl=en)
-   [Scopus](https://www.scopus.com/authid/detail.uri?authorId=6506463530)
-   [DBLP](https://dblp.org/pers/hd/v/Vitaletti:Andrea)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[1\] F. Angeletti, I. Chatzigiannakis, and A. Vitaletti, “The role of
blockchain and IoT in recruiting participants for digital clinical
trials,” in *2017 25TH INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON SOFTWARE,
TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND COMPUTER NETWORKS (SOFTCOM)*, {2017}, pp.
427–431.

\[2\] U. M. Colesanti, C. Crociani, and A. Vitaletti, “On the Accuracy
of OMNeT plus plus in the Wireless Sensor Networks Domain: Simulation
vs. Testbed,” in *PE-WASUN’07: PROCEEDINGS OF THE FOURTH ACM WORKSHOP ON
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF WIRELESS AD HOC, SENSOR, AND UBIQUITOUS
NETWORKS*, {2007}, pp. 25–31.

\[3\] M. Mastrogiovanni, C. Petrioli, M. Rossi, A. Vitaletti, and M.
Zorzi, “Integrated Data Delivery and Interest Dissemination Techniques
for Wireless Sensor Networks,” in *GLOBECOM 2006 - 2006 IEEE GLOBAL
TELECOMMUNICATIONS CONFERENCE*, {2006}.

\[4\] K. Massri, A. Vitaletti, A. Vernata, and I. Chatzigiannakis,
“Routing protocols for delay tolerant networks: A reference architecture
and a thorough quantitative evaluation,” *JOURNAL OF SENSOR AND ACTUATOR
NETWORKS*, vol. 5, no. 2, Jun. 2016.

\[5\] P. Karkazis, P. Trakadas, T. Zahariadis, I. Chatzigiannakis, M.
Dohler, A. Vitaletti, A. Antoniou, H. C. Leligou, and L. Sarakis,
“Resource and service virtualisation in m2m and iot platforms,”
*INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT ENGINEERING INFORMATICS*, vol. 3,
nos. 2-3, SI, pp. 205–224, 2015.

\[6\] M. Paoli, F. Ficarola, U. M. Colesanti, A. Vitaletti, S. Citrigno,
and D. Sacca, “Extending tetra with wireless sensor networks,”
*INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF INTELLIGENT ENGINEERING INFORMATICS*, vol. 3,
nos. 2-3, SI, pp. 225–243, 2015.

\[7\] A. Vitaletti, “GENDE: GENetic design best products evolve
according to users feedback,” *Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering*,
vol. 413, pp. 101–110, 2017.

\[8\] D. Amaxilatis, I. Chatzigiannakis, I. Mavrommati, E. Vasileiou,
and A. Vitaletti, “Delivering elder-care environments utilizing
tv-channel based mechanisms,” *Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Smart
Environments*, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 783–798, 2017.

\[9\] S. Chatterjee, S. Das, K. Maharatna, E. Masi, L. Santopolo, I.
Colzi, S. Mancuso, and A. Vitaletti, “Comparison of decision tree based
classification strategies to detect external chemical stimuli from raw
and filtered plant electrical response,” *Sensors and Actuators, B:
Chemical*, vol. 249, pp. 278–295, 2017.

\[10\] I. Chatzigiannakis, A. Vitaletti, and A. Pyrgelis, “A
privacy-preserving smart parking system using an iot elliptic curve
based security platform,” *Computer Communications*, vols. 89-90, pp.
165–177, 2016.

\[11\] S. Das, B. Ajiwibawa, S. Chatterjee, S. Ghosh, K. Maharatna, S.
Dasmahapatra, A. Vitaletti, E. Masi, and S. Mancuso, “Drift removal in
plant electrical signals via iir filtering using wavelet energy,”
*Computers and Electronics in Agriculture*, vol. 118, pp. 15–23, 2015.

\[12\] S. Chatterjee, S. Das, K. Maharatna, E. Masi, L. Santopolo, S.
Mancuso, and A. Vitaletti, “Exploring strategies for classification of
external stimuli using statistical features of the plant electrical
response,” *Journal of the Royal Society Interface*, vol. 12, no. 104,
2015.

\[13\] F. Ficarola and A. Vitaletti, “Capturing interactions in
face-to-face social networks.” pp. 613–620, 2015.

\[14\] A. Pennisi, F. Previtali, C. Gennari, D. Bloisi, L. Iocchi, F.
Ficarola, A. Vitaletti, and D. Nardi, “Multi-robot surveillance through
a distributed sensor network,” *Studies in Computational Intelligence*,
vol. 604, pp. 77–98, 2015.

\[15\] C. Petrioli, R. Petroccia, D. Spaccini, A. Vitaletti, T. Arzilli,
D. Lamanna, A. Galizial, and E. Renzi, “The sunrise gate: Accessing the
sunrise federation of facilities to test solutions for the internet of
underwater things.” 2014.

\[16\] A. Di Cagno, M. Paoli, U. Colesanti, and A. Vitaletti, “REACTIVE:
A peaceful coexistence between deluge and low power listening.” pp.
137–142, 2014.

\[17\] D. Amendola, F. De Rango, K. Massri, and A. Vitaletti, “Efficient
neighbor discovery in rfid based devices over resource-constrained dtn
networks.” pp. 3842–3847, 2014.

\[18\] M. Paoli, A. Lo Russo, U. Colesanti, and A. Vitaletti, “MagoNode:
Advantages of rf front-ends in wireless sensor networks,” *Lecture Notes
in Electrical Engineering*, vol. 281 LNEE, pp. 125–137, 2014.

\[19\] L. Becchetti, L. Bergamini, U. Colesanti, L. Filipponi, G.
Persiano, and A. Vitaletti, “A lightweight privacy preserving sms-based
recommendation system for mobile users,” *Knowledge and Information
Systems*, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 49–77, 2014.

\[20\] A. Pennisi, F. Previtali, F. Ficarola, D. Bloisi, L. Iocchi, and
A. Vitaletti, “Distributed sensor network for multi-robot surveillance,”
vol. 32. pp. 1095–1100, 2014.

\[21\] S. Chatterjee, S. Ghosh, S. Das, V. Manzella, A. Vitaletti, E.
Masi, L. Santopolo, S. Mancuso, and K. Maharatna, “Forward and inverse
modelling approaches for prediction of light stimulus from
electrophysiological response in plants,” *Measurement: Journal of the
International Measurement Confederation*, vol. 53, pp. 101–116, 2014.

\[22\] K. Massri and A. Vitaletti, “DTN routing protocols on resource
constrained devices: Design, implementation and first experiments.”
2013.

\[23\] K. Massri, R. Beraldi, and A. Vitaletti, “Erasure-coding based
data delivery in delay tolerant networks,” *Lecture Notes in Computer
Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence
and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics)*, vol. 8121 LNCS, pp. 188–200,
2013.

\[24\] D. Amendola, F. De Rango, K. Massri, and A. Vitaletti, “Neighbor
discovery in delay tolerant networking using resource-constraint
devices.” 2013.

\[25\] U. Colesanti, A. Russo, M. Paoli, C. Petrioli, and A. Vitaletti,
“Poster abstract: Structural health monitoring in an underground
construction site: The roman experience.” 2013.

\[26\] V. Manzella, C. Gaz, A. Vitaletti, E. Masi, L. Santopolo, S.
Mancuso, D. Salazar, and J. De Las Heras, “Demo abstract: Plants as
sensing devices: The pleased experience.” 2013.

\[27\] L. Becchetti, L. Bergamini, F. Ficarola, F. Salvatore, and A.
Vitaletti, “First experiences with the implementation and evaluation of
population protocols on physical devices.” pp. 335–342, 2012.

\[28\] K. Massri, A. Vernata, and A. Vitaletti, “Routing protocols for
delay tolerant networks: A quantitative evaluation.” pp. 107–114, 2012.

\[29\] L. Becchetti, L. Bergamini, F. Ficarola, and A. Vitaletti,
“Population protocols on real social networks.” pp. 17–24, 2012.

\[30\] L. Becchetti, L. Filipponi, and A. Vitaletti, “Privacy support in
people-centric sensing,” *Journal of Communications*, vol. 7, no.
SPL.ISS. 8, pp. 606–621, 2012.

\[31\] L. Becchetti, U. Colesanti, A. Marchetti-Spaccamela, and A.
Vitaletti, “Fully decentralized recommendations in pervasive systems:
Models and experimental analysis,” *Engineering Intelligent Systems*,
vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 161–170, 2012.

\[32\] L. Becchetti, L. Bergamini, F. Ficarola, and A. Vitaletti,
“Population protocols on real social networks.” 2012.

\[33\] L. Bergamini, L. Becchetti, and A. Vitaletti, “Privacy-preserving
environment monitoring in networks of mobile devices,” *Lecture Notes in
Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial
Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics)*, vol. 6827 LNCS, pp.
179–191, 2011.

\[34\] U. Colesanti, S. Santini, and A. Vitaletti, “DISSense: An
adaptive ultralow-power communication protocol for wireless sensor
networks.” 2011.

\[35\] L. Becchetti, U. Colesanti, A. Marchetti-Spaccamela, and A.
Vitaletti, “Recommending items in pervasive scenarios: Models and
experimental analysis,” *Knowledge and Information Systems*, vol. 28,
no. 3, pp. 555–578, 2011.

\[36\] M. Di Zenise, A. Vitaletti, and D. Argles, “A user-centric
approach to eCertificate for electronic identities (eIDs) management in
mobile environment.” pp. 198–203, 2011.

\[37\] I. Chatzigiannakis, G. Mylonas, and A. Vitaletti, “Urban
pervasive applications: Challenges, scenarios and case studies,”
*Computer Science Review*, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 103–118, 2011.

\[38\] L. Bergamini, C. Crociani, A. Vitaletti, and M. Nati, “Validation
of wsn simulators through a comparison with a real testbed.” pp.
103–104, 2010.

\[39\] E. Baglioni, L. Becchetti, L. Bergamini, U. Colesanti, L.
Filipponi, A. Vitaletti, and G. Persiano, “A lightweight privacy
preserving sms-based recommendation system for mobile users.” pp.
191–198, 2010.

\[40\] I. Chatzigiannakis, U. Colesanti, S. Kontogiannis, G. Leshem, A.
Marchetti-Spaccamela, J. Mehler, G. Persiano, P. Spirakis, and A.
Vitaletti, “MURPESS - multi radio pedestrian energy scavenging sensor
network.” 2010.

\[41\] L. Filipponi, A. Vitaletti, G. Landi, V. Memeo, G. Laura, and P.
Pucci, “Smart city: An event driven architecture for monitoring public
spaces with heterogeneous sensors.” pp. 281–286, 2010.

\[42\] S. Santini, K. Roemer, P. Couderc, P. Marrón, D. Minder, T.
Voigt, and A. Vitaletti, “System architectures and programming models,”
in *Cooperating embedded systems and wireless sensor networks*, ISTE,
2010, pp. 347–404.

\[43\] A. Vitaletti and S. Puglia, “System overview of next-generation
remote healthcare,” in *Systems design for remote healthcare*, K.
Maharatna and S. Bonfiglio, Eds. New York, NY: Springer New York, 2014,
pp. 31–53.

\[44\] L. Becchetti, A. Marchetti-Spaccamela, A. Vitaletti, P. Korteweg,
M. Skutella, and L. Stougie, “Latency-constrained aggregation in sensor
networks,” *ACM Transactions on Algorithms*, vol. 6, no. 1, 2009.

\[45\] I. Cappiello, S. Puglia, and A. Vitaletti, “Design and initial
evaluation of a ubiquitous touch-based remote grocery shopping process.”
pp. 9–14, 2009.

\[46\] P. Korteweg, A. Marchetti-Spaccamela, L. Stougie, and A.
Vitaletti, “Data aggregation in sensor networks: Balancing communication
and delay costs,” *Theoretical Computer Science*, vol. 410, no. 14, pp.
1346–1354, 2009.

\[47\] L. Becchetti, U. Colesanti, A. Marchetti-Spaccamela, and A.
Vitaletti, “Self-adaptive recommendation systems: Models and
experimental analysis.” pp. 479–480, 2008.

\[48\] S. Santini, B. Ostermaier, and A. Vitaletti, “First experiences
using wireless sensor networks for noise pollution monitoring.” pp.
61–65, 2008.

\[49\] L. Filipponi, S. Santini, and A. Vitaletti, “Data collection in
wireless sensor networks for noise pollution monitoring,” *Lecture Notes
in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial
Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics)*, vol. 5067 LNCS, pp.
492–497, 2008.

\[50\] U. Colesanti, C. Crociani, and A. Vitaletti, “On the accuracy of
omnet++ in the wireless sensor networks domain: Simulation vs. testbed.”
pp. 25–31, 2007.

\[51\] M. Ringwald, K. Römer, and A. Vitaletti, “Passive inspection of
sensor networks,” *Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including
subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in
Bioinformatics)*, vol. 4549 LNCS, pp. 205–222, 2007.

\[52\] D. Dubhashi, O. Häggström, L. Orecchia, A. Panconesi, C.
Petrioli, and A. Vitaletti, “Localized techniques for broadcasting in
wireless sensor networks,” *Algorithmica (New York)*, vol. 49, no. 4,
pp. 412–446, 2007.

\[53\] A. Vitaletti and G. Palombizio, “Rijndael for sensor networks: Is
speed the main issue?” *Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer
Science*, vol. 171, no. SPEC. ISS., pp. 71–81, 2007.

\[54\] P. Korteweg, A. Marchetti-Spaccamela, L. Stougie, and A.
Vitaletti, “Data aggregation in sensor networks: Balancing communication
and delay costs,” *Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including
subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in
Bioinformatics)*, vol. 4474 LNCS, pp. 139–150, 2007.

\[55\] C. Petrioli, C. Pierascenzi, and A. Vitaletti, “Bluetooth
scatternet formation performance: Simulations vs. testbeds.” 2007.

\[56\] M. Mastrogiovanni, C. Petrioli, M. Rossi, A. Vitaletti, and M.
Zorzi, “Integrated data delivery and interest dissemination techniques
for wireless sensor networks.” 2006.

\[57\] L. Becchetti, P. Korteweg, A. Marchetti-Spaccamela, M. Skutella,
L. Stougie, and A. Vitaletti, “Latency constrained aggregation in sensor
networks,” *Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in
Bioinformatics)*, vol. 4168 LNCS, pp. 88–99, 2006.

\[58\] A. Marcucci, M. Nati, C. Petrioli, and A. Vitaletti, “Directed
diffusion light: Low overhead data dissemination in wireless sensor
networks,” vol. 4. pp. 2538–2545, 2005.

\[59\] L. Becchetti, S. Leonardi, A. Marchetti-Spaccamela, A. Vitaletti,
S. Diggavi, S. Muthukrishnan, and T. Nandagopal, “Parallel scheduling
problems in next generation wireless networks,” *Networks*, vol. 45, no.
1, pp. 9–22, 2005.

\[60\] E. Trevisani and A. Vitaletti, “Cell-id location technique,
limits and benefits: An experimental study.” pp. 51–60, 2004.

\[61\] L. Orecchia, A. Panconesi, C. Petrioli, and A. Vitaletti,
“Localized techniques for broadcasting in wireless sensor networks.” pp.
41–51, 2004.

\[62\] L. Becchetti, S. Diggavi, S. Leonardi, A. Marchetti-Spaccamela,
S. Muthukrishnan, T. Nandagopal, and A. Vitaletti, “Parallel scheduling
problems in next generation wireless networks.” pp. 238–247, 2002.

\[63\] M. Curcio, S. Leonardi, and A. Vitaletti, “An experimental study
of prefetching and caching algorithms for the world wide web,” *Lecture
Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in
Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics)*, vol.
2409, pp. 71–85, 2002.

\[64\] R. Jana, T. Johnson, S. Muthukrishnan, and A. Vitaletti,
“Location based services in a wireless wan using cellular digital packet
data (cdpd).” pp. 74–80, 2001.

\[65\] S. Leonardi, A. Marchetti-Spaccamela, and A. Vitaletti,
“Approximation algorithms for bandwidth and storage allocation problems
under real time constraints,” *Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and
Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics)*, vol. 1974, pp. 409–420, 2000.

\[66\] S. Leonardi and A. Vitaletti, “Randomized lower bounds for online
path coloring,” *Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in
Bioinformatics)*, vol. 1518, pp. 232–247, 1998.
